CHAOS-5921 Revamped resilience probes (#7224)
harness/developer-hub: docs/chaos-engineering/features/resilience-probes/use-probe.md

---
title: Define and use a resilience probe
sidebar_position: 2
description: Steps to define and use a HTTP probe in the UI
redirect_from:
- /docs/chaos-engineering/configure-chaos-experiments/probes/configure-and-add-probe
- /docs/chaos-engineering/features/probes/configure-and-add-probe
---

This topic describes the steps you can follow to create and use a resilience probe in your chaos experiment.

## Before you begin

- Go to [probe overview](/docs/chaos-engineering/features/resilience-probes/overview) to get an understanding about probes.
- Go to [chaos faults](/docs/chaos-engineering/chaos-faults) to understand where probes are used.
- You should have an active chaos infrastructure where you can schedule the chaos experiment.

> - Enterprise Hub connectivity status should be active

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enterprise Hub connectivity status should be active.
```

- Read/write access to the chaos experiment to schedule or navigate to the probe addition UI.
- Read access to the chaos infrastructure to select a chaos infrastructure when creating an experiment.

> - Read access to the chaos hub to select faults from the chaos hub while creating an experiment.

Reviewer 2: Can we check these prerequisites again! To configure a probe we only require the chaos experiment edit permission. It has no direct relation with hub, infra, or faults at all.

Once the prerequisites are fulfilled, you can configure and add a probe to your experiment using the following steps.

:::tip

> Currently, resilience probes is behind the feature flag `CHAOS_PROBE_ENABLED`. Contact [Harness support](mailto:support@harness.io) to enable it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, resilience probes are behind the feature flag `CHAOS_PROBE_ENABLED`. Contact [Harness support](mailto:support@harness.io) to enable it.
```

> - If you are an existing customer, you will see the old flow of control in resilience probes by default and you have the choice upgrade to the new flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you are an existing customer, you will see the old flow of control in resilience probes by default and you have the choice to upgrade to the new flow.
```

  ![setup](./static/use-probe/setup-6.png)

:::tip

> If you are a first time user, you can create a resilience probe directly from Chaos Studio drawer (from within an experiment). For this, you will see an option to add a system probe (which is a health check system probe) as a one click button. This will not be present if you have configured atleast one resilience probe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are a first-time user, you can create a resilience probe directly from the Chaos Studio drawer (from within an experiment). For this, you will see an option to add a system probe (which is a health check system probe) as a one-click button. This will not be present if you have configured at least one resilience probe.
```

> If you are a first time user, you can create a resilience probe directly from Chaos Studio drawer (from within an experiment). For this, you will see an option to add a system probe (which is a health check system probe) as a one click button. This will not be present if you have configured atleast one resilience probe.

Reviewer 2: Not just for first time users, but for users who are using the platform but haven't created any resilience probes yet.

  ![add more](./static/use-probe/add-more-4.png)

:::tip
- Based on the type of probe you select, enter the values to set up the probe.

	**You can:**
	- Use any number of probes within a chaos experiment.
	- Use the same probes for two faults within the same chaos experiment.
	- Use Kubernetes-based probes for Kubernetes experiments.
	- Use Linux-based probes for Linux experiments.

	**You can't:**
	- Repeat the same probe multiple times in the same fault in the same experiment.
:::

## Create probe using YAML

> The entire manifest is available as a YAML file, which can be accessed by switching over to the YAML view in Chaos Studio. Below is a sample manifest for the pod delete fault.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The entire manifest is available as a YAML file, which can be accessed by switching to the YAML view in Chaos Studio. Below is a sample manifest for the pod delete fault.
```

                          value: "2"
                        - name: PODS_AFFECTED_PERC
                          value: "100"
                        - name: CONTAINER_RUNTIME
                          value: containerd
                        - name: SOCKET_PATH
                          value: /run/containerd/containerd.sock
                        resources: {}
                        securityContext:
                          containerSecurityContext: {}
                          podSecurityContext: {}
                        statusCheckTimeouts: {}
                      rank: 0
                  jobCleanUpPolicy: retain
                status:
                  engineStatus: ""
                  experiments: null
```

## Update resilience probes
You can [update (or edit) a probe](/docs/chaos-engineering/features/resilience-probes/use-probe#edit-a-resilience-probe) from within an experiment or from the **Resilience Probes** tab.

:::tip
Resilience probe names act as unique identifiers for a probe, which means you can't edit them. If you manually add the name of a probe in the manifest, this same name should be entered in the annotation as ID.
:::

> When you wish to enter the probe name in the manifest (manually) as a probeRef annotation, follow the below format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you want to enter the probe name in the manifest (manually) as a `probeRef` annotation, follow the below format:
```

```

> probeRef: '[{"name":"probe-name","mode":"SOT"}]'

Reviewer 2: `name` has been updated with `probeID`

```

> Here, `probe-name` is the name of your probe.

Reviewer 2: This should be the ID instead

If you use the user interface, this step is not required.

## Resilience probes status matrix

Probe status is the single source of truth when executing a chaos experiment. The probe status in a chaos experiment can be in 4 different states.

- **AWAITED**: A probe status is in 'awaited' state until the fault is being executed, that is, the fault is still running. Once it has completed execution, it can be in the 'passed', 'failed' or 'N/A' state.
- **PASSED**: A probe status is considered 'passed' when the success criteria is met.
- **FAILED**: A probe status is considered 'failed' when the success criteria is not met.
- **RUNNING**: A probe status is considered 'running' when the probe is currently in execution.
- **N/A**: A probe status is in the 'N/A' state when the result of the fault could not be determined.

:::info notes
- ChaosHub support for resilience probes is not available yet.
:::

## Force delete resilience probes

> - When you force delete a probe, it will not be available for use. You will lose history of that probe, but experiment runs that used the probe will contain the history of the probe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When you force delete a probe, it will not be available for use. You will lose the history of that probe, but experiment runs that used the probe will contain the history of the probe.
```

> - Once you delete a probe, information pertaining to the probe reference is also deleted from all the manifest references, that is, the probe is removed from the probeRef annotation. This ensures that the next possible run will not schedule the probe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once you delete a probe, information about the probe reference is also deleted from all the manifest references, that is, the probe is removed from the probeRef annotation. This ensures that the next possible run will not schedule the probe.
```

Only when you **hard delete** a probe, you can reuse the name of that probe.

## Resilience probes support
Resilience probes are supported by the following features:
- Resilience Tab
- Chaos Studio
- Experiments/Run Reports
- Linux and Kubernetes experiments
- GameDays
- Sandbox environment

## Default/System resilience probes

- You can create system (default probes) at the project level **only once**.

> - Once you create a default probe, you can't delete or disable or update it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once you create a default probe, you can't delete, disable, or update it.
```

> - If you have more than one resilience probe in your chaos experiment, you can disable, delete or update the system probe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you have more than one resilience probe in your chaos experiment, you can disable, delete, or update the system probe.
```

- Default probes are a part of resilience probes and are entered as annotations in the experiment manifest.

## Image registry support

> - You can configure the image registry to be used with the default probes. If you haven't configured a probe yet, the experiment will use default image registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can configure the image registry to be used with the default probes. If you haven't configured a probe yet, the experiment will use the default image registry.
```

> - HCE doesn't provide image registry support at the moment for default probes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- HCE doesn't currently provide image registry support for default probes.
```

:::info notes
- **Legacy probes support (Backward compatibility)***: Users can still use [legacy probes](/docs/chaos-engineering/features/resilience-probes/cmd-probe).

> - **Audit integration**: There are no audit events for resilience probes.

Reviewer 2: There are audit integrations for resilience probes

- **Access control permissions division**: ACL is mapped to the experiment ACL.
:::

## License

> - Resilience probes are not a part of any subscription, and hence you don't have any limit on the number of probes you can create. With respect to usability, 1,000 probes can be executed in a month.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Resilience probes are not a part of any subscription, and hence you don't have any limit on the number of probes you can create. Concerning usability, 1,000 probes can be executed in a month.
```
